KEP-5073: Declarative Validation: Explain and update document with cross-field validation information (#5290)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/5073-declarative-validation-with-validation-gen/README.md

  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>
     numeric limits (constant or field refs capable)
   </td>
   <td>
    `+k8s:minimum`, `+k8s:maximum`, `+k8s:exclusiveMinimum`, `+k8s:exclusiveMaximum`
   </td>
   <td>

>     minimum, maximum, exclusiveMinimum, exclusiveMaximum (for constants); x-kubernetes-validations (for field refs)

Reviewer: lost the markdown format. . Intentional?

Author: Unintentional, thanks for catching this.  Fixed now.

    N/A
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>
    union member (Discriminated/Non-Discriminated)
   </td>
   <td>
    +k8s:unionMember={"union": ""}
   </td>
   <td>
    x-kubernetes-unions
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>
    union discriminator
   </td>
   <td>
    +k8s:unionDiscriminator={"union": ""}
   </td>
   <td>
    x-kubernetes-unions
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>
    immutable value
   </td>
   <td>
    +k8s:immutable
   </td>
   <td>

>     x-kubernetes-validations (CEL: !has(oldSelf...) || self... == oldSelf...)

Reviewer: Accidentally left CEL here?  If we're trying to avoid it, we don't need it here right?

Author: This intention of the text there was to show the OpenAPI equivalent for +k8s:immutable which would be using x-kubernetes-validations with a CEL expression similar to that shown.  I can remove this text, just wanted to note the current intent which is aligned with not using CEL in v1.34.  This column is to note how some declarative validation rules map-to/could-be-output as OpenAPI rules.

Author: I've removed this now, the immutability KEP Update already added a row related to this that did not reference CEL.

    *   Rules defining relationships where fields must appear together, be consistent if both present, or satisfy a bi-directional implication (A if and only if B).
*   Complex/Custom Logic

From this list of categories, the goal for Declarative Validation is to create dedicated tags capable of handling these categories similarly/identically to the current validation logic. The table in "Catalog of Supported Validation Rules & Associated IDL Tags" includes a number of these cross-field validation tags targeting the above categories including:

*   Non-Discriminated & Discriminated Unions: `+k8s:union[Member|Discriminator]`
*   Comparison: `+k8s:[minimum|maximum]` w/ field ref support
*   Transition Rules - Immutability: `+k8s:immutable`.

Some categories can be covered by extending and or/chaining a combination of tags. For example “Status Condition Validation” can, for identified cases (example below for CertificateSigningRequest), be handled using a combination of `+k8s:subfield` (enhanced to support targeting list entries) and `+k8s:unionMember`:

```go
type CertificateSigningRequestStatus struct {
       // +k8s:subfield({"type":"Approved"})=+k8s:optional

>        // +k8s:subfield({"type":"Approved", "status": "true"})=+k8s:unionMember

Reviewer: I thought I remembered that unions were named in one of the previews I saw.  The detail will be in the impl PR?

Author: I have updated this to use named unions now which is the recommended way to use unions.

For simple cases where there is only one union on a struct, currently there is a default name when no `union` name value is set (example from dev-branch: https://github.com/jpbetz/validation-gen/blob/main/staging/src/k8s.io/code-generator/cmd/validation-gen/output_tests/tags/union/undiscriminated/simple/doc.go#L33)

       // +k8s:subfield({"type":"Denied"})=+k8s:optional
       // +k8s:subfield({"type":"Denied", "status": "true"})=+k8s:unionMember

       // +k8s:subfield({"type":"Failed"})=+k8s:optional

>        // +k8s:subfield({"type":"Failed"})=+k8s:immutable

Reviewer: The impl PR will go into the "immutable after create" versus "immutable once set"?

Author: Yes, the related impl PR will go into the "immutable after create" versus "immutable once set".

       // +k8s:subfield({"type":"Approved", "status": "true"})=+k8s:unionMember

       // +k8s:subfield({"type":"Denied"})=+k8s:optional
       // +k8s:subfield({"type":"Denied", "status": "true"})=+k8s:unionMember

       // +k8s:subfield({"type":"Failed"})=+k8s:optional
       // +k8s:subfield({"type":"Failed"})=+k8s:immutable
	Conditions []CertificateSigningRequestCondition
}
```

#### Cross-Field Validation and Ratcheting
For cross-field validations, the validation logic is evaluated at the common ancestor of the fields involved. This approach is necessary for supporting ratcheting. While validation tags (eg: +k8s:maximum=siblingField, +k8s:unionMember , etc.) may be placed on an individual field for clarity, the tag and its associated validation logic will be "hoisted" to the parent struct during code generation. This "hoisting" means the validation is treated as if it were defined on the common ancestor.  By anchoring the cross-field alidation logic at the common ancestor, regardless of tag placement, the ratcheting design can more reliably determine how to perform equality checks across the relevant type nodes and decide if re-validation is necessary.

> As noted in the Ratcheting section there is an additional challenge that arises if a cross-field validation rule (e.g. X < Y) is defined on a common ancestor struct/field, and an unrelated field (e.g. Z) within that same ancestor is modified. This change to Z makes the common ancestor “changed” overall, triggering re-validation of the X < Y rule. If this rule was recently evolved, it might now fail even if X and Y themselves are not modified by the user’s update. This could violate the principle “Unchanged fields do not cause update rejections”. In practice this means that the validation rules (or validation-gen generally) might have to be more explicit where each validation rule explains “I only care about these fields for ratcheting”.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As noted in the Ratcheting section there is an additional challenge that arises if a cross-field validation rule (e.g. X < Y) is defined on a common ancestor struct/field, and an unrelated field (e.g. Z) within that same ancestor is modified. This change to Z makes the common ancestor “changed” overall, triggering re-validation of the X < Y rule. If this rule was recently evolved, it might now fail even if X and Y themselves are not modified by the user’s update. This could violate the principle “Unchanged fields do not cause update rejections”. In practice this means that the validation rules (or validation-gen generally) might have to be more explicit where each validation rule explains “I only use these fields as inputs" for ratcheting.
```

> For the initial implementation, this behavior will be documented, and cross-field validation rules must handle ratcheting themselves.  This means that in the initial implementation of the cross-field dedicated tags referenced in the document (+k8s:unionMember, etc.), they will handle ratcheting of the fields they operate on directly.  See the Ratcheting section for more information on this issue as well as longer term plans on addressing this challenge.

Reviewer 3: Do you think it is more nature that first paragraph is in cross-field section and the 2nd & 3rd paragraphs are in ratcheting section? Maybe you don't need to put a sub-title for that 1st paragraph and then refer to the ratcheting section of how to handle this challenge case?

Author: +1, I've combined paragraphs 2 & 3 into a single paragraph and de-duped the majority of text from the `Ratcheting and Cross-Field Validation` section in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5292
